The effects of lexical frequency on vowel duration in Spanish
monolinguals
================

## Overview and motivation

Past research has found that, in English production, content words with
higher lexical frequency tend to shorten (Gahl, 2008). Motivated by
these findings, we examine whether this relationship between lexical
frequency and vowel duration exists in Spanish in the same manner. In
particular, we ask whether more frequent words will shorten in Spanish
production.  
To examine this question, particular emphasis will be placed on the
duration of the stressed vowel.

Additionally, rather than examining corpus data as in previous studies,
the present study will examine vowel duration and frequency in both
comprehension and production in an experimental setting by the same
speakers. This design will allow for more specific conclusions to be
drawn in regard to whether the frequency effect is perceptually or
articulatorily driven. It is worth noting that in her corpus study on
the production of English homophone pairs, Gahl (2008), concluded that
frequency information was encoded in the lemma, and that articulatory
routinization could not explain her data, since homophone pairs share
the same articulatory routine, yet consistently showed different
durations modulated by lexical frequency. It is possible that this
shortening was perceptually driven if the duration of vowels in the
input, but the limitations of a corpus study do not allow for studies in
perception. The present study thus simultaneously aims to replicate the
findings of a lexical frequency shortening effect in Spanish production,
but this time in an experimental setting, and to examine this effect in
perception.

## Research Questions

I propose the following research questions:

RQ1: Will vowel duration of stressed syllables in Spanish words be
shorter as lexical frequency increases?

RQ2: Do Spanish speakers match shorter vowel durations to more frequent
words?


## Proposed tasks

### Production task ideas

1.  Diapix task - a map task done in partners to elicit naturalistic
    production. Partners are given two pictures of the same scene but
    with differences. The task is intended to elicit the production of
    particular words.

2.  Elicited Production task - we could do an EPT with the words in
    question in a carrier sentence - but previous studies have not found
    this method to show frequency effects, since speakers seem to read
    these sentences at similar paces in the same task. In other words,
    there was a task effect here that might not be indicative of
    reality.

3.  Other - I donâ€™t have other ideas, but I am open to them\!

### Perception task ideas

1.  2afc task - we could do a 2-alternative forced choice task with
    homophones here and re-synthesize stimuli on a continuum. The
    paraticipants would hear the audio of a word and choose (or we could
    just do the vowel sound). If we only present vowel sounds, and not
    whole words, we may be able to do this task without using homophone
    pairs.

## Analysis

For production, we might be able to do multiple regression, since we
have two continuous variables (lexical frequency and duration), although
I am unsure how many different word productions we will want to analyze.
There are also other challenges to naturalistic production (like
syntactic category, phrase final lengthening, word predictability etec.)
that we might be able to control for statistically, but I am unsure how
much data we need to be able to do so.

2afc - The analyis would be similar to the pafri/bafri studies and my
QP, in which we would expect two s-shaped curves and we can caluclate
the cross-over boundary using a function that Joseph wrote.
